# Order of Reaction (continued)


As we alluded to in the previous section, one way to determine the order of reaction is to change one species’ concentration and see if the rate is affected. For example, if we suspect the reaction X+Y→Z is first order with respect to X, doubling [X] should double the rate of reaction.

However, changing [X] may lead to Y being used up faster, in turn affecting the reaction and making it harder to attribute any change in the rate solely to the change in [X], posing a problem. There are two options to resolve this issue, both with their limitations.

### Measuring the Initial Rate
This method involves measuring  how the initial rate of reaction changes when [X] is varied. This works because in this very short period of time over which the initial rate is measured, the change in [Y] will be too small to affect the rate. The main limitation is the challenge in getting enough data points in a short space of time to be able to calculate an accurate value for the initial rate. 

### Excess Concentration 

This method involes keeping Y in excess, in other words [Y]<sub>initial</sub> >> [X]<sub>initial</sub> so that even when all of X has reacted, the change in [Y] will be negligible and have essentially no effect on the rate of reaction. For example, if we start with a concentration of Y 100 times that of X, then when all of X has reacted, [Y] will have decreased by only 1%.

One issue with this method is the large value of [Y] can make the reaction very fast, leading to [X] dropping very quickly and making measurement challenging. Fast reactions can also cause safety issues (a slow burn vs. an explosion). A further issue is the potential for competing reactions. For example, in addition to reacting with X, Y may also be able to react with itself (called a "self-reaction"). The possible reactions are therefore: 
X+Y→ZX+Y→Z
Y+Y→AY+Y→A
Having large concentrations of YY would mean the reaction Y+Y→AY+Y→A would be fast and most of YY would be lost via self-reaction. The reaction of  X+Y→ZX+Y→Z would be hard to observe and again determining the order would be hindered by the change in [Y][Y].
