# Bonding & Anti-bonding Orbitals

In the atomic orbital course, the concept of phase, relating to the sign of AO wavefunction at a particular point in space, was introduced. This is important when considering molecular orbitals too.
Consider two 2pz orbitals overlapping head on along the z axis. If the lobes which interact have the same phase this is is called overlapping "in phase". This is shown below in the xz plane. 


Alternatively, the interacting lobes of the atomic orbitals could have opposite phase. This leads to "out of phase" overlap as shown below. 

When considering the case of two atomic orbitals overlapping, **in phase overlap will lead to the formation of a molecular orbital which is lower in energy than the atomic orbital which formed it** - this is called a bonding molecular orbital.
By constrast, **out of phase overlap results in the formation of a moelcual orbital which is higher in energy than the atomic orbitals which formed it** - this is called an anti-bonding molecular orbital.


The shapes of the resulting molecular orbitals depend on the the atomic orbitals which are interacting and we will look at several examples shortly. However, first it is worth considering the relationship between energies of the atomic and molecular orbitals.

Consider the case where two identical atomic orbitals overlap - for example 2pz orbitals from two fluorine atoms. The atomic orbital will be degenerate (same energy) and we can represent the molecular orbitals formed in the MO diagram below.


 
The arrows represent the electrons and their directions correspond to the spin (msmsvalue) of the electrons in the orbitals - note that, just as in a fully occupied atomic orbital, in the molecular orbital the electrons must have opposite spin. In this case, as only the bonding MO is filled with electrons, the energy of the system is lowered when a bond is formed (relative to the having two electrons in the AOs) and therefore bonding is favourable. 

If electrons are placed in the anti-bonding MO, they will raise the energy of the bonded system relative to the separate atoms. When considering the energy benefit of bonding, the reduction in energy by placing electrons in bonding MO(s) is compared to the increase in energy which occurs if any electrons are placed in the anti-bonding MO(s).  

For reasons beyond the scope of this course, the anti-bonding MO is actually raised in energy, relative to the AOs, by an amount slightly greater than the bonding MO is lowered. Therefore, if the anti-bonding MO is also filled completely with electrons, the overall energy of the system will be higher than if the atoms had not formed a bond, in other words bonding is not favourable.
