# AO contributions to MOs

When degenerate atomic orbitals form molecular orbitals, the starting AOs are both the same distance in energy from the bonding  MO. Therefore both AOs contribute equally to both the bonding MO. This case is shown below. 

However, the orbitals forming MOs are often not degenerate. In this case, the lower energy orbital (AO2) is closer in energy to the bonding MO and the higher energy orbital (AO1) is closer in energy to the anti-bonding MO. This means AO2 contributes to the bonding MO more than AO1 does and vice versa. This is shown below. 



### Visualising unequal contributions 
The bonding MO will be unevenly distributed, weighted towards the AO2 side. In practice, this means that the isosurface of the bonding MO will appear bigger near the nucleus of atom 2 than for atom 1. As expected then, the anti-bonding MO will be weighted towards the AO1 side.

Visualising unequal contributions
Below is shown the σσ (bonding) MO formed by the overlap of 2px2px orbitals from carbon and fluorine. The overall shape of MO is similar to that formed by two degenerate AOs (see the bonding MO shown in Section 5) but it is clear that it is weighted more towards fluorine.  


By contrast, the σ∗σ∗(anti-bonding) MO is weighted more towards the carbon (shown below). The general features of a σ∗σ∗ MO formed from two p orbitals are still present. 

It should be noted that in reality ionic bonding is more complicated than this but the idea that there is a sliding scale between purely covalent bonding (degenerate AOs overlapping) to (almost) purely ionic bonding (overlapping AOs of very different energy) is a useful framework. 


### Unequal contributions in terms of LCAO 

The LCAO method allows allows us to represent the unequal contribution to an MO by its constituent AOs mathematically. In homo-nuclear diatomics like H2H2 the coefficients of each AO will be of the same magnitude for a given MO. When the constituent AOs are not degenerate, the lower energy AO will have a bigger coefficient for the bonding MO and the higher energy AO will have a bigger coefficient for the anti-bonding MO. 

Consider the C-F sigma bond:
The bonding MO arises from the in phase overlap of the atomic orbitals of carbon ϕCϕC and fluorine ϕFϕF which have coefficients cC,σcC,σand cF,σcF,σ respectively. 

  ψσ=∑iciϕi=cC,σϕC+cF,σϕNF⇒cF,σ>cC,σψσ=∑iciϕi=cC,σϕC+cF,σϕNF⇒cF,σ>cC,σ
  
The larger contribution made by F is represented mathematically by the larger coefficient cF,σcF,σ.
Anti-bonding MO  arises from the out of phase overlap of the atomic orbitals of carbon ϕCϕC and fluorine ϕFϕF which have coefficients cC,σ∗cC,σ∗and cF,σ∗cF,σ∗ respectively. 

ψσ∗=∑iciϕi=cC,σ∗ϕC−cF,σ∗ϕF⇒cF,σ∗>cC,σ∗ψσ∗=∑iciϕi=cC,σ∗ϕC−cF,σ∗ϕF⇒cF,σ∗>cC,σ∗

The larger contribution made by F is represented mathematically by the larger coefficient cC,σ∗cC,σ∗.
The methods for calculating the values of the coefficients is beyond the scope of this course. 


### Implications

The uneven distribution of an MO between atoms in a bond is important when it comes to considering chemical reactions. Chemical reactions occur via the interaction of atomic or molecular orbitals and an incoming molecule will normally react with an MO via its biggest lobe. For example, consider again the σσ and σ∗σ∗ MOs of a C-F bond. The Fluorine is lower in energy than Carbon so the σσ is weighted towards the Fluorine (isosurface is "bigger" on the F side) and the anti-bonding MO towards the Carbon. Another molecule attacking the σ∗σ∗ to break the C-F bond will attack via the Carbon side. The distribution of electron density within a molecular orbital is important when considering reaction mechanisms. 

### Energy match and ionic bonding

We can extend the idea of unequal contributions to an extreme example. Consider a situation where the two overlapping atomic orbitals have very different energies. What will the MOs look like? As the diagram below shows, the bonding MO will be almost identical to AO2 and the anti-bonding MO will be almost identical to AO1. With this being the case, the idea that there is a covalent bond between the two atoms is much more tenuous because a covalent bond requires the electrons to be shared between the atoms while in reality, since the bonding MO is essentially the same as the AO2, the "bonding" electrons are localised on atom 2. Thus we have arrived at a (crude) explanation of ionic bonding. The highly ionic species NaF can be explained by this model as the 3s electron in Na is much higher in energy than the 2p electrons in F. 



